+++
title = 'Sierra Solo Climbs, September 2023'
date = 2023-09-23T19:18:58-07:00
layout = 'post'
aliases = ['/trip-reports/sierra-solo-climbs-sep-2023.html']
+++

_Note: Clicking on any photo opens the large version in a new tab. To view the entire photo album, click
[here](https://photos.app.goo.gl/w2mA7uhScovS7VxJ9)._

## Monday, Sep 11: Tuolumne Triple Crown attempt

I awoke early on Monday and left El Cerrito at 4:41am in my rented Kia Forte, stopping briefly in Oakdale for a glazed
donut. (I gave myself license to eat all sorts of junk given the upcoming level of exertion!) I pulled into the parking
lot at Tenaya Lake a mere four hours after leaving home and started up the trail towards the Northwest Buttress of
Tenaya Peak at 8:47am.

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc87zpXhCZudYmXJBMIMAUOiJn1XbNPUyF10mUUAy2NNb7Qw0duKIeCUUZuCCT3SaKvHdPMpV2DwIPZWwB_TRATPZMKUPmH0Or9-0-LM1k_4xtiIo0QCyjLfDgEL8aR9VmZ3jIP1cbZx7PxDuj4YgJqk=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Tenaya Peak from the approach." >}}

My goal for the day was to complete the _Tuolumne Triple Crown_, a link-up of three relatively easy technical rock
climbs: the [Northwest Buttress of Tenaya Peak
(5.5)](https://www.mountainproject.com/route/105900951/northwest-buttress), the [Matthes Crest Traverse from South to
North (5.7)](https://www.mountainproject.com/route/106008982/matthes-crest-traverse-south-to-north), and the [Southeast
Buttress of Cathedral Peak (5.6)](https://www.mountainproject.com/route/105835705/southeast-buttress). On their own, any
one of these would be straightforward. Trying to do all three in a day, however, requires some considerable speed.
Admittedly ambitious coming directly from sea level!

In the end, i completed only the first two climbs and omitted Cathedral Peak from the itinerary:

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc-wITqgsgE6oFuOynrgA0rHulMXQPrqsyDSWkhrSiOGPhUKl0BVND0gSwd1BFeJREw4wgKWVflFn3cq5HjS5tnHcg1qX8N0Bz6_a1p9hLesmfJoe16a_fQKbcJ7B7qNK0UeHnDw9WtVLENe_yoAi6l5=w2976-h1876-s-no" caption="The actual route i ended up taking, enchaining the Northwest Buttress of Tenaya Peak and the traverse from south to north of Matthes Crest. Blue is hiking, yellow/orange is technical (5th class) climbing." >}}

{{< vimeofigure id="866943827" title="Tenaya-Matthes Crest linkup" caption="Animation of the route.">}}

After topping out on Tenaya Peak, i headed through a part of Yosemite's high country you won't see if
you stick to the trail.

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc8pu0SLth16XJL5-Jj-nIVm8t70xhSLS7v-QhlyL3uomc6Csl2kf8xqBVkWkslbzfDi8PKzrBZlGQafheb9wXma4C-q__ZaT-SlGTsvCteqshOx2srQof2zTKOiAEVxQYPE-r-HFuPw7f9aMBUu0etR=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="The view north from the pass toward Tressider Peak (left). Cathedral Peak visible at center." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc86u9-l7ixVt9-sh6ZtytyvBXKV2-pZ23RJuXpEz9uoq7vbr-aRcRvhlikPcPb9zje1KF52kaISTBUdgIvsWL4SGYf2vJ6yb7bs_SY_-FF5NweOZ_JjqsUd6ItVtpnKZYd9d5UcOX_LRqLZAupqWN3W=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="The view south from the pass toward Columbia Finger (right)." >}}

Matthes Crest is an astonishing, 1.5-mile-long knife-edge ridge of granite, more of a horizontal rock climb than a
vertical one.

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc9t5PH3T0f49aTWOlY1GS2Bz3gyi6Nvn3Cgp-0A-PhiDu25a13IHSjXOB4lLIZ8LupqApig0O08QhRsQD-FcbdupiHvInIgfUIbcpuCTB-9L6G4sQdpx2Q3umEfDPLx3cksTWMA0Ajhzoqkk6q255IP=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Looking up at the beginning of Matthes Crest." >}}

One of the consequences is that you get incredible, nearly 360-degree views along almost the entirety of the climb.

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc-B7UIITqipYuPihJPC9McBSTiyMfjku6Ur242y3KZD7gXU6jmNbU9NxS7a-yyLA-5j5PsClh7q1kQvHoKKXWywXNBSZXPMInN9AQjgaegC67KYUm4xshyWSCeIgydPN-8RqL2JEAmonVaenqUT3ssM=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Looking north towards Echo Peaks and Echo Ridge." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc8m4LFHY3cbTcjAXqVKVA0TxEKk5l21ErV8UxRwpMJtMzFcPmW3hOdN9uA3_00zo81U-DbcV0YKxY_8SZ9r4W5kl4AddPcBioPvKRSqoNu6Q3gy00Pdcy0SB7vBrnGaFMG0cZaXgYFBPDOxyOd6E0Cu=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Looking south towards Red Peak and Merced Peak." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc_gRIfivow5sA440Zwb-pq7qEzqgAeVM3v3P_tmsi6zzohV8dAf42f-OMbihqsr4waiV_f1oL3x6Ao4b3EACvOmLSD8-xBNn-ISpDMQZ9bkLa02Kf4zfOAK5HNL5Fany67FZLYeLztgA5YmtUL_R0hE=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Storm approaching from the south." >}}

{{< vimeofigure id="866947670" title="Matthes Crest end" caption="Nearing the end of the route.">}}

At around 2:45pm, it was becoming clear that i couldn't count on the weather to hold, so i decided to descend after
finishing the traverse of Matthes Crest and head back to the car, passing the popular Cathedral Lakes along the way.

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc9IPNP7XD_OCz7mWgtNAMIyQ3bqIVKCPgavWWxXjKjgKRS1b8i0ShbLGRXoPWfyOVcZzenKfcMdrNRHTKnkzpBjfJSbZ4coq29jPiG935qhsMnhIbmDPcoIsstuUznmrJUWWFKWJ6snp5ZTP6K0BvLj=w1726-h2300-s-no" caption="Cathedral Peak above Upper Cathedral Lake." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc9pQGbovo3XE3GynLFi6yc-GcIFNAOpcThYtA8sV2GQCCeJeC6y9fduCpC1Uoldm83wnlrbCCFnddTSaKpmJZhDSjG7pmHCLGgL1MNcJNDNY-El4kxF40yYSmdHefH3TgGmpc2PKX4_4tKVBZb8LTbQ=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Granite slabs surrounding Lower Cathedral Lake." >}}

Feeling good about having soloed two entirely new climbs, i headed east to camp at Saddlebag Lake.

## Tuesday, Sep 12: Tuolumne Alpine Triple Crown

For my second day in the mountains, i had chosen an even longer and more committing objective: the so-called _Tuolumne
Alpine Triple Crown_, a link-up of the [North Ridge of North Peak (easy 5th
class)]("https://www.mountainproject.com/route/107727366/northwest-ridge") the [North Ridge of Mount Conness
(5.6)]("https://www.mountainproject.com/route/105982681/north-ridge") and the [West Ridge of Mount Conness
(5.6)]("https://www.mountainproject.com/route/106167844/west-ridge") the last of which i had done with Amy just a few
weeks earlier.

I arose early again, and after suffering through another serving of instant coffee, hit the Saddlebag Lake Trail at
5:51am.

{{< vimeofigure id="866946066" title="Tuolumne Alpine Triple Crown" caption="Satellite view animation of the Tuolumne Alpine Triple Crown." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc-NNJa7EQ3UuFgn-4C6kUWg-MUjWcJp-uwGw3a-8hmhMYmL2Hjl5o9Cv2Gc_tXdmzAXgZckc3PKQAmdfLx3lyOlfKAZtvBdq2kwbRulOJEuBULxVmqaAxyI1Ul3dz5RCtNKAUjB9UX57SuHmsxAJmXF=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Alpenglow on the northeast face of Mount Conness." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc-3MJAWQPKxmyl84iZfGU4qFlVuooVWWwKXJebY_Yu_oK-xh7CrgsSzg-S6lOq8d8IN5GRi-q8wRP42vkQEZRIvfN3tCoP_wqmwEP3SlirD3jnJs4NnwYBuSOVZxfe5rlEqOwQW8V0ikHIfpztB29io=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Early morning light on the rugged northeast aspect of North Peak." >}}

In just about two hours i had transitioned to scrambling along the lower portion of the ridge toward the summit. It was
somewhere around this time, just after the moves had started getting difficult, that i opened my pack and realized
something quite inconvenient: I had dropped my driver's license and credit card on the approach trail, at least an hour
back the way i came. I weighed the options: Call off the climb and go back to find my valuables? Or continue on, and
deal with the consequences later?

I figured my chances of finding the cards was not great, so i opted to continue on and go back to search for them after
i'd finished for the day, if i had any daylight left.

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc_LG2VznpNFOK8K6cUQWuf6x4x9-dFjiToS2ULVlfXiQ1Rd6ohWirUkhpWWKmIoDinAxD4lnm6bhYLnKdoxQzIIu1VTfv_IzAlmvoU7YHfqqILEQxgDX1612L62J6CynXUTCQvBFMlBaQa81xg1neMR=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Snow-filled couloirs on North Peak." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc9L7x5JU9P3Pxd1na2J8o5Csepgjpk7j9YA_RYCEZh0Ar2750Ctg_HFMhrO3iZXmTcXdvRogSkHL6C8lBWIgVQheLPmAWtnsVVzyBT_Z5CrlBKEwO8MXI5xSnbijHPiAslltFhFfeWHn8cgyklyBUFy=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="The view northwest from the ridge." >}}

The storm that had loomed on the horizon the day prior had hit these peaks hard, and a layer of rime coated much of the
upper portion of the route, definitely upping the spice factor on what would otherwise have been a mellow climb. Around
8:40am i reached the summit of North Peak and downed another energy bar. After a quick traverse, it was time to start up
the North Ridge of Mount Conness.

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc8WDFB83BtWj_ewFuiLwZnq9tPOyC5kv-HYl7KCePQNTDPsfjmeo6XKuxctw6FZHwCdNiQghi0oJwpO4JHGXV1wPEPjWasdpRdN0kK6IdnOkPLNZGi2FYM4pywZi8Rv_0RmW4oUexYx38JvTouE9PsI=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="The gleaming white, broken granite of the North Ridge of Conness." >}}

It is a truism in climbing that going down is more difficult than going up. The North Ridge of Mount Conness is often
given a rating of 5.6, but this pertains to a downclimb; many parties opt to bypass this most difficult section by
abseiling with a rope, which i had intentionally left in the car. This would be the first of many downclimbs in my week
of travels.

As on the Northwest Ridge of North Peak, the upper portions of the North Ridge of Mount Conness were coated with ice,
forcing me to climb even more carefully and slowly than usual, eventually reaching the summit shortly after 11:00am.

{{< vimeofigure id="866949461" title="Mount Conness summit view" caption="View from the summit of Mount Conness. Sorry i didn't hire a videographer." >}}

After a painstaking downhill slog over steep, sandy ledges, mixed sand and gravel precisely at the angle of repose, and
an extensive talus field, i reached the base of the West Ridge of Mount Conness. You might be wondering at this point
why i would climb to the same summit two different ways on the same day. I can offer no satisfactory defense. All i can
say is the West Ridge offers some terrific climbing. Plus, it was in the sun, so no ice on this one!

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc-nLcleMR2-zRCOAQoYQXvMY8Qli3bdV5Qz2OikjDtVslNISgB8dsrsYirTIChJeRJBzhEMkAZwAsyXs8iZiytpdyS5x_ZcQ4NCo6qaHflaF1L_lSqCR7_mbctI4xCdLkwNzeNRiamyQrf1Vn9R-2Kj=w1280-h960-s-no" caption="Displaying fine taste in fashion after topping out the West Ridge. Conness Lakes in the background." >}}

It was around a quarter to three in the afternoon when i finished the third route, but i still had several miles to
cover and a couple thousand vertical feet to descend.

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc9mMa-xCkrGJb_i9OvChBNy3Dh8DJMPtlqDsSpZLuVYXZeFNP9AN0v1Bs0i7N7mnT24xsTZTVLFmUM6qUe9oDcYQDCXNbwiSMU9nMEBoyOfQiPjnSY1BpuFtsVmU8wspsjIQ5Dj5BhCxicYdOKwv7HH=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Partway down the descent." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc9xwoR3a6fLujbka-inWyrLc3f6dPV7sqV-T97Tph_5P5HbhWzbCqkysg0w4gx-ofAvbVF4cSZML_-ZkL9FLxAKjR-lNYt8iXyZscnu0QmkEiwbYUhwOqUw5JEudv0VMyKsO7xiSstLuSDfGfPlWcpQ=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="The Hall Natural Research Area on the descent." >}}

When i finally reached the car, it was 4:51pm—exactly 11 hours since i'd begun the journey. Despite my exhaustion, i
dropped my pack in the car and retraced my steps from the morning, an hour out and an hour back, searching for my lost
credit card and driver's license. No luck. It was nearing sunset now, and i gave up the search.

I'll spoil the ending for you: Some kind soul found my valuables several days later (Saturday) and reached out to me on
LinkedIn. Interesting how things go these days!

This day of climbing really took it out of me, and i decided i was going to rest the next day instead of foolishly
attempting a dual summit of Banner Peak and Mount Ritter. That will have to wait for next season.

## Thursday, Sep 14: Thunderbolt to Sill Traverse attempt

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc97dgILgtbkpUZLvK34h9Aig1-GIn9070LIMJYWSHEXaFJ5F49maBsnP2JemdYSIj8tbIMmU3vg6--yfyRmTfAlFDxcwXKHpWt90lJHVNv-yG9t8ulpLekaUE662W0ohvytZ5z13OKs957gvGOXxiL1=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Sunset over Four Jeffrey campground on Wednesday night." >}}

After a lazy Wednesday spent swilling coffee in downtown Mammoth Lakes and reading Madeline Miller's _Circe_ (highly
recommend!) by the shore of Lake Mary, i drove down to Bishop to prepare for another ambitious objective: the
[Thunderbolt to Sill Traverse (5.9)]("https://www.mountainproject.com/route/106513790/thunderbolt-to-sill-traverse").
This ridge traverse comprises five distinct 14,000-foot peaks in a relatively short distance, in the heart of the
Palisades.

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc_pvU3dWxv7BPNRNvj2efVUSoHEl5i3WWWtZZvNgPSxm7-K0lsP0dVxxQn1cnFbEL8KC8dNqM-jGNfWtQ2Dc0t2mmPVy4X7dhcdzEdcf8uuctJ7UMEcIUGoGt9GfhQWkYMxtYJmgkM5XxY5GYRvfrSE=w2268-h1300-s-no" caption="Satellite view of the traverse." >}}

Most sensible climbers tackle this over two or three days, camping either at Sam Mack Lake on the east side of the
ridge, or near Thunderbolt Col on the west side. Climbers without a fully developed understanding of their limits, like
this author, attempt to do the whole thing car to car in one day.

The shortest approach, from the southwest side, is about 8 miles, most of it on the gorgeous Bishop Pass Trail and the
remainder on relatively easy terrain in Dusy Basin. If you start the traverse from Winchell Col, you're looking at a
total of about 13 miles of hiking on trail, 5 miles of cross-country hiking, 1 mile of 3rd class gully scrambling, and
1.5 miles of 4th and 5th class technical terrain—not for the faint of heart!

{{< vimeofigure id="866950427" title="Approach over Bishop Pass" caption="Approach on the Bishop Pass trail." >}}

With so much ground to cover, i began over an hour before sunrise, at 5:11am, hiking in the dark (with a headlamp). Now
came the strangest breakfast i've eaten in a while: two strawberry Pop-Tarts, a string cheese, and an extremely cold
black bean Crunchwrap Supreme i'd picked up at Taco Bell the day before. (It got down into the 30s overnight.) I washed
it all down with electrolyte water. My conclusion was that Crunchwraps are only ever meant to be consumed immediately
after purchase. The food may not have been a highlight, but at least the early morning views were.

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc_QwV230DBb0izq0ZgEd040MfhidUb_IZ_NaKz7SkaVqqYXvnc1zqY912-e2WbQnvOpLZeozG14yOtnbU6BqUcuGGQ7Tkt5jxN2y_pHOa2__NRu87i6Y_sx24FjYuUPsverTbTPa1R1s1-Bb4JpsUkb=w1726-h2300-s-no" caption="Mount Goode over Long Lake in early morning light, Bishop Pass trail." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc8J0OBxoGrFycMQHee9N1-USk71qKrN53STaKKdnDhGJ9ZRuSPQzAVtS8r9MZYVFxCFabbHF7owGJMA1MOBDT6O0H1Tr5Tgd9JUzzn0TPiBKeRnO9EG3rK2so9HnpB8uU0TgrxMFzcbT5L0DvEVRp9B=w4480-h1002-s-no" caption="Dusy Basin panorama from Bishop Pass." >}}

After a few miles of relatively easy cross-country travel, i started up the loose gully towards Winchell Col, a real
slog through mixed rock media. Once on the ridge, i saw there was a LONG way left to go to Thunderbolt Peak, and i began
to regret my decision to start from Winchell Col, rather than attempt a shorter, easier variation of the traverse,
starting with a direct chute to the summit of Thunderbolt Peak.

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc-29h2uY_EcnruCcCCEAiJu6hbeT1x8nGGXFbPiSMZqwnJy-CazWlPBEdOv0vmnEIoihmquZwkgJLFYVEek0UYt-Su4ssmQ7vLF1KhCVL36V3Z0x_bVpnvACHmxPYh2iMXz6rI-eJGz4Z6X_l7fyY3y=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Looking south towards Starlight Peak's 'milk bottle' summit (highest spire in photo) and Thunderbolt Peak (middle distance, left)." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc_Tzh6S-xcDo1ziVJU7gQaBnc9hDgEzke92nDHVn0JNJ801YsmXIrVpl4zm8WzGmZh3b-blfd3-RZ2BwVkk0NCW1GUD-I7_CeQ0v8tLvwYqjrxL0NGHOzUJ_ucx55HEx3TS2LsUTlLayknWcgmNbH7z=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="View to the west from the ridge below Thunderbolt Peak." >}}

It was noon—nearly a full seven hours after i departed the car—by the time i reached the summit of Thunderbolt.

{{< vimeofigure id="866952226" title="Thunderbolt Peak summit view" caption="Atop the summit of Thunderbolt." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc_h_nP7rW5CY8Z_oIe1ddypE1rGdsZRULEIpfNLUL1FFDFcXIjcTGCI89Ct2t0bvGO_VtmOh3SNZc5OB6S91SYj2EmM0C2k1_SZnuW3ayY6blJIifl7lPXctloxM7vqtx01Cc9pdBx65mqitG2TETIa=w1726-h2300-s-no" caption="The long ridge to the summit of Starlight." >}}

Somewhere in between T-Bolt and Starlight, it began snowing. I considered bailing, but the snow stayed light enough not
to imperil my climb.

{{< vimeofigure id="866953198" title="Starlight Peak summit view" caption="Atop the summit of Starlight." portrait=1 >}}

Fortunately, Starlight Peak and North Palisade are lumped pretty close together, so it didn't take too much more time to
reach the summit of North Pal (14,248'), the fourth highest and "most mountainous" mountain in California, which i
reached at approximately 2:45pm.

{{< vimeofigure id="866951504" title="North Palisade below summit" caption="Just below the summit of North Palisade." >}}

{{< vimeofigure id="866956263" title="North Palisade summit" caption="Atop the summit of North Palisade." >}}

Climbing without a rope forces you to be so present, almost everything else falls away, including self-consciousness.
The only thing happening is movement: hand there; foot moves here; repeat. Most of us have experienced this "flow" state
at some point, and i have to think being able to attain that flow state is one of the more compelling reasons to climb
in this style. That said, it's hard to convey the toll, the mental exhaustion, that it incurs to be exposed to mortal
fall danger for so many hours continuously. When i finally reached the summit of North Palisade, i wept. I've felt the
grandeur of summits before, but this time, the tears were mostly from sheer fatigue, and relief at still being alive.

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc9IHuX5zB_8UAKX-pe4rajCSLRIuwUBY0Oh2aCd6IFL0spheyV3Rb6kq53jyPYl9hy6B3fh6M3-OwwoC8gR0tSMVJqQUpNm8-UQxCG_82vuieqKHCg1QckEfaIHj6fcMbWq-9-Xwh5b6_nZnrJFe_5h=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Shoes off." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc-ohAjpQsskZB329U4XP5UJqRoywokm8-X_xDJ9kvM9BzQEGAUOGXx1mzI3DWSJdBIpNSgvXveKl0nzDVpyjQw9SphW9jBaCmfxSv2n9eFtfVCaJ5b-4BU4chMsGuovFrVsVkoudJeJKfp6u7d-Jdw4=w4480-h992-s-no" caption="Summit panorama, facing west." >}}

The decision having been made to abort the traverse at 3/5 complete, i began the long, arduous descent.

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc8UmbCnhXd0jD4bnYTDVq-nESVtshCZnLzrhEPdqp0HCtXk1In6KulKbmV7IRl_g9XcX8DPjDFlGmali56Iu3Jjae8TziA8j9pkfs5GGhr1iP9yX8RiVHdJ8HN9uCryzQL03LMtE1bHY88Bhij6Ce75=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="This was what i was looking at for about half the day." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc8hSWxgpuT25YJU1hHqEsFDCns1wEC33KIwT5fE8Hc9eLc3Xk5SscCJdt-Os0wbDkcnuGEUq4ub3OOfm0ysKolPp0C6tHvzRgsGqu6TMKVX7T2EQTagXXDqh_0oA4XnYKSeZKmCIBwWJt0-hkIOBEm0=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Even a thousand feet down, the view still rocks." >}}

By the time i returned to the maintained trail, it was sunset.

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc-hsj-ecMHg9wCcw9XBgtls6ERNvRfyNqJhJ7k31NF_zOVpTtiHAzpeF2PPmSs4kui-h--lZT8-8HUBs4kHNzPyGlcYF-tR1HHxXzqLH-4o7_KGCrZDIqIb_gLjhtijVgpDs4XW3usAxVr561cPvkIJ=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Sunset over Dusy Basin, from Bishop Pass." >}}

Those last six miles of trail are a blur. I was practically stumbling at that point, hiking for an hour and a half by
headlamp, again, much as i had early that morning. I think there was a danger that if i stopped, i might fall asleep
curled up in the fetal position on the side of the trail. At long last, i reached the car at 8:59pm, nearly sixteen
hours after first setting out.

## Friday, Sep 15 - Sunday, Sep 17: Italy Lake Loop

Most people, including myself, don't usually look at backpacking as a relaxing, non-strenuous activity. But after the
climbs of the previous days, that's exactly how i was thinking of it: You mean i don't need to use my hands? Falling
doesn't mean death?

After a leisurely morning at camp and midday in Bishop, i drove to the Pine Creek trailhead.

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc-b-Qw04HYzWHldWxT6qJUPZWE8tWkfqKsXtf7ePDDNSDzN9KpgLJDjIOzCuIieR7pUG_HO4-_MTzguq6HSvGWG3dKVyie0pNdsPrCZjKAvz3Vlk0bxSaXUGgKRUwTX_s9OfkgZ3POQqtvoin8imolE=w1726-h2300-s-no" caption="Pine Creek tungsten mine, which closed in 2001." >}}

On the menu was a 3-day loop through the Mono Divide, a mostly unbroken massif above 11,000' right smack in the
center of the High Sierra.

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc-epqKoVM8ufhDyX1OnhHY9eNXNzemkfP8w8Q-gx0i-lNToJMQydbYRcxGwCQ69wMHGhxWOcVDbi0JDTcgWVf5jeHoKGrSwklGyNrppdCxsxWN-kPZZli5bgqmfh78tzDTYIjdSNKZapUV-8P4ot8N7=w2200-h1800-s-no" fc_BifbVBgplFwVqsIZVBEiu_84IEfzQpTmVG4jOMKZtph7fQQvF4TlulYVsQ5aSiZflf494T8ez7Ym_RIVMQwccmEApvJ="tfch7dhN0TiYU81BEr0BP7FfUUHwCgaFMSn1HTJ2w5-Q_8i_GFv2bSKdL=w2956-h2008-s-no" caption="The route i took (clockwise on the loop portion)." >}}

In all honesty, it was an uneventful trip, and that's a good thing! I'll let the photos speak.

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc9DLzuDxeTYQTaKOM3jKRaDe2drm5B_z7N93KaLcWlIIpkKT4brd67I1MzVJ-hrY6mpiwhAXAQg_bVbnTiXm8vfeTXwYavEvMQ2pYD9Ic5iPaJ6iGYvxGxuu9EdlnxHX4o2THpGayclyBbibRYCmgUb=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Pine Creek Lake." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc-YDek4yZM5PR7cAWkdOlYgxMOuQ3yjGGPrTHQDmE1UFzv5-G11NFg6ebRzXJHzjngCQcVAp3icnnShWpoaJaiXtHjuKyxX18vR6NNvGvaAMhJwoMKrwM_UzAuXuL3xMypAuPytyJlNZeCuSnHGnSgZ=w4480-h996-s-no" caption="Merriam Lake panorama." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc__6dVFDuU0YYPXWEjJD3GGCHuaYhrUjGkYY3jKZMTjEMDF807RrPSqBJmj3j1TW_PrrXRvewGT8AklZlIEW7IoTWKqcuMzpnya3EiZ71jRpMk78h3wBvcIb2l7xXCiAWaaLgH226AuGJDjfQQuzfFf=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Most of the high passes still have snow on north and east faces very late this year." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc_DV8OYmOAQ759DEIubfyf5nDNVn30q6v2TPeLVYWEaM-Gb53sFKuQBq51YVUKOjUKuzaOKxXlNa2GX1opGwjUolvjTWnHkUV2aTWGXVAnnsuF4moucyl90XAa4Sm7F7MXjLkrkOilZHM9uII-areH3=w4480-h1046-s-no" caption="Bear Lakes Basin panorama." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc-JreyZoVbczSPk6fKSqkgo-0HsEimITAE8MI8wDtKIkb1B4cSPIEA0tLUEbBosJQtgkSbs0VZcMyaXNIGB57LyKuqeVfiuqlUVhD5PejLfIJ__IiSsASac_pPrbUcu7IRcJ6uf13ONOtP9W56n1NoV=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Weaving through another high alpine meadow in the Bear Lakes Basin." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc_h6vvSql11OgyAcYtICX9LaGDNfFQzFMhEn4tZC2E9INX-dvvrKOzT0re6gawoZ75YzwxwZEYptcfJTXk2F9Kt1S9tAGKBv-aId62jy0LbISwW7e1l35ixJVlFNPeXBL8N3sAH6DycapX91jhiAqGn=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Time for a breather by Teddy Bear Lake." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc90a0ftNJ4yxNyd1bQ71sYZdPpuzMHqEJAMaMaq7ojjT2WHJFW0PXuarR2G87B7YYVTIGZRRV8iqgiwdRIR-t7v0koyqg4HZTJlF4M3EC1tcfbw6cRQFhMmuCBHstYbDVihMVNc0H-e5h8UsBkAfN6P=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Night two campsite, on the Hilgard Branch near Lake Italy." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc-_9K3AMlNX3YP9iO60QsXTJDM-Hc-fu765dJyXTqL190VmFJ7B3xBpGmRA9s38A3wyNDom8ZNC8qVbWys6Y2JcF0g6nNH1hFsjPFCOZZWZIestPOgwAA059FDxOq6UjkTO69oabB1_X9g3wGv_Fbev=w4480-h1052-s-no" caption="Dramatic sunset after an afternoon rainstorm. Mount Hilgard on the right." >}}

{{< vimeofigure id="867052891" title="Lake Italy south shore" caption="Navigating around Lake Italy required unconventional technique." portrait=1 >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc-0dW6Vbs4ZTaU0C53rXdY0Am2lmLpCKshNCKAewYvrmRZhraYMcZStCJhwwI3aVOhu3cMKjyrXW4Cjuf-bIgOt7AMy5toZbOdl-Hp1GVH6XFRM5pVCiBjmOBq9z-N7ACps9lQP4RGQJx0rFvSGTj5q=w4480-h1048-s-no" caption="Lake Italy panorama. L to R: Mount Hilgard, Gabb, Abbot, Dade, Bear Creek Spire, and Julius Caesar." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc-lpqDCnOZeUIdn7yQ8K3QD2803xfNUZoJGG8f5YnT8bU0J1VDUXWcF_F1f6u-S_sEWXYL0b8tL9dgkbJXOZxG_KUbe--v6fc8eZ-ayWoqjxdtIBebbdgF7bVhaD3Rud3b5IsRhFP4eQC1BJqvNHf3L=w4480-h1002-s-no" caption="Granite Park panorama." >}}

## Monday, Sep 18: Cathedral Traverse

For my last day in the mountains, i decided to return to Tuolumne Meadows to enjoy some classic Yosemite high country
lines: the [Southeast Buttress of Cathedral Peak
(5.6)]("https://www.mountainproject.com/route/105835705/southeast-buttress"), Echo Peak #3, [Echo
Ridge]("https://www.mountainproject.com/route/121327473/the-echo-ridge"),
[Cockscomb]("https://www.mountainproject.com/route/121621939/west-face"), and Unicorn Peak.

{{< vimeofigure id="867072492" title="Cathedral Traverse" caption="The Cathedral Traverse i did." >}}

Amy and i had climbed Cathedral Peak together last summer with gear and a rope, and it hadn't been a cakewalk, so there
were definitely some nerves surrounding that climb. I grabbed a sizeable breakfast at Mammoth Coffee Roasters and drove
to the Cathedral Lakes trailhead, quickly hiking in on the Budd Lake trail. When i pulled up to the base of the climb
just before 10:00am, there were about ten people already there: a party of two one pitch up the wall, two parties of
three roping up at the base, and two soloists preparing to start off to the left.


{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc8hMrdOPy4VwPxg3mF2P1HHyx6_wWG0cdGpdwwi5tuuIcfqkoQ5BE7T9CAKKqMMmlYh1He2HfpsSnlny00wpvwFQ8PjdN-Wgo8XcOzR53W6sV9rP0DB3umgFRSRt-fVvmuE6G35QUa6SJJ0LAlKR1WI=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="A crowded day on the SE buttress of Cathedral. Can you spot the climbers? I count six visible. This was taken when i got back down to the base after finishing the climb." >}}

Unlike on most climbing routes, on the 700-foot-tall Southeast Buttress there is more or less a sea of features and thus
myriad possible variations to climb, meaning that crowds are a little bit less of an issue. Nonetheless, i was concerned
about getting held up behind one of the roped parties—gear and a rope will always slow you down!—so i hurriedly changed
into my TC Pros, strapped on my helmet, and started up the rock face. (One of the other ever-present dangers is
human-caused rockfall, which is especially perilous to soloists, yet another reason to pass roped parties.)

Let me say at this point that i think the Southeast Buttress of Cathedral Peak might be my favorite rock climbing route.
It always seems to deliver a knob to step on or a large fin to pull on. The rock quality is consistently amazing, the
views and exposure incredible, and it has that sacred _je ne sais quoi_ that inspired John Muir to famously declare,
"This I may say is the first time I have been at church in California."

After a mere 40 minutes of mostly blissful climbing, i reached the summit. Funny enough, it took me 45 minutes to return
to the base after i was done—longer to get down than to climb up!
 
{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc-_CqZQ2yaoCjqMEvMTxJIJU762IEDbNXUyooYsef6MP7x8ngRzbQ9rVHEgjlZf2vUAdgoRLr__Owcn0ZLcy_4nqScpQTvNWxotIIR7Jy18pl9gXax83CouzilhL43abi3Q5XrGtqZnOobvJDVROddn=w4480-h992-s-no" caption="Panorama shortly below the summit of Cathedral, looking north." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc-IuqIP6Hb4w0jrVSQUcKDTKSn6FlbxOpb03MWBoBQx3pqFf35qpWQigkWYNG2O9qjOd3b4eWSnKJ47bPbNLUrIdn_agSnUSv9l1wt4NEfP2CZlU0WaD_2wsg4FRWZhSdsVvMb4yAavllEl-QYR9Uht=w1280-h960-s-no" caption="I soloed that thing!" >}}

The biggest climb out of the way first, i felt much less worried about the others.

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc82f_Gf8DFDj9ZfiIe2tHKejWe6mxVLtm52mG_7T4vrbBNvOa2GEZDe_byK86ZzO64e5FY4echXyABxwPZUuqBmunwsVoIBXyNdaZ4GP93xquvPGvwvrGfyADIw2zOM7xuJSGkCl6h3-l0Ayx-PVfhj=w4480-h992-s-no" caption="Panorama from the summit of Echo Peak #3." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc_fqbDa1_ECS3o1qSzPZeFdWiFkz2USfaVXfqW0MmQwgaI7kP0Z0TEqiparpOnEyOooihm24IjwtSGAx_efWBKyH24CScV8yJyUKlJezcNEBRs5Z1e6zeok8sSz_bYPl8o3w0yDgeAEELjl2FJ8gres=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Atop Echo Ridge, looking northeast towards Mount Conness (upper left) and Lembert Dome (center)." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc82oZFJD4fmxoGjEl_ctHlk3Nw8HubG8Im-fq8AjSaquBqmLFEcYvkTdxbVxEfZ27BR1mWuzV2vd_rPNwM77g6yD1KoRKmc6p_ZNek2t1VxAYR2L3miSrdsheYND6F1AnZUQlVE7xC_ouDwEHBRYlvL=w3066-h2300-s-no" caption="Looking up towards Cockscomb." >}}

{{< remotephoto src="https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/pw/AIL4fc9Mzn6S0DlnriZwAORHo_h-0fV-QG5q12ykDhA3o7L_5BNvwdH4uRdu8esLxo3u5gXwaBP5p_4Lmg3vmAVh0x2Rxo645heYCEq3g2TvDkuc7udijgKzdieoqdfbb48o_czvuiJuZC83_B_ynm8Auzja=w1726-h2300-s-no" caption="Cathedral Peak over Budd Lake, on the way back to the car." >}}

In the end, i skipped Unicorn Peak, having been filled to satiety with beautiful climbing and the tips of my fingers
having been turned to hamburger meat by full days of pulling on sharp granite. It was time to head home.

I can already feel the tug of the mountains once again...

If you care to see the entire collection of photos i took, which is about three times as many as are in this trip
report, [see the album here](https://photos.app.goo.gl/w2mA7uhScovS7VxJ9).
